README.md, before:

# Omniauth::Cognito::Oauth2

[Ruby gem Oauth2 strategy for AWS Cognito](https://rubygems.org/gems/omniauth-cognito-oauth2)

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-cognito-oauth2'
```
Then `bundle install`

## Setup

You will need:

 - An AWS Cognito user pool
 - A domain setup for your user pool
 - An App Client set up for your user pool:
   - Callback URL will look something like `https://localhost:3000/users/auth/cognito_oauth2/callback` (standard with a Devise User model)
   - Signout URL will look something like `https://localhost:3000/users/sign_out` (standard with a Devise User model)
   - Check at least the `Authorization code grant` OAuth flow option
   - Check at least the `openid` and `email` OAuth scopes
   - *Don't* set up your App Client with a 'Client Secret' because at the moment they don't work and won't allow you to authenticate.
 - For development, you'll need to be running your app with SSL enabled, because Cognito user pool App Client callback and signout URLs only allow HTTPS URLs. This unaffiliated [blog post](https://madeintandem.com/blog/rails-local-development-https-using-self-signed-ssl-certificate/) details steps on obtaining a self-signed SSL certificate and running rails in SSL mode while referencing the cert
 - A config variable on your dev machine which contains your domain - something like `COGNITO_USER_POOL_DOMAIN=https://your_user_pool_domain.auth.us-west-1.amazoncognito.com` for your variable, and then `Rails.configuration.local_settings['COGNITO_USER_POOL_DOMAIN']` in your code (if using Rails)
 - A config variable on your dev machine which contains your App Client ID - something like `COGNITO_CLIENT_ID=your_app_client_id` for your variable, and then `Rails.configuration.local_settings['COGNITO_CLIENT_ID']` in your code (if using Rails)

## Usage

Here's an example for adding the middleware to a Rails app in `config/initializers/omniauth.rb`:

```ruby
require 'omniauth_cognito_oauth2'

Rails.application.config.middleware.use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :cognito_oauth2, 'MY_COGNITO_CLIENT_ID', scope: [:openid, :email],
    setup: lambda{ |env|
      env['omniauth.strategy'].options[:client_options].site = 'MY_COGNITO_USER_POOL_DOMAIN'
    }
end
```

Since Cognito has many different client sites, we are using a lambda to dynamically set the site that you wish to authenticate against. This will be the domain you have setup for your user pool. There is more info in the Authorization Code Grant section in the AWS docs [here](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mobile/understanding-amazon-cognito-user-pool-oauth-2-0-grants/).

You can now access the OmniAuth Cognito OAuth2 URL: `/auth/cognito_oauth2`

## Usage (Devise)

First define your client id and user pool domain in `config/initializers/devise.rb`.

```ruby
require 'omniauth_cognito_oauth2'

Devise.setup do |config|
  #...
  config.omniauth :cognito_oauth2, 'MY_COGNITO_CLIENT_ID', scope: [:openid, :email],
    setup: lambda{ |env|
      env['omniauth.strategy'].options[:client_options].site = 'MY_COGNITO_USER_POOL_DOMAIN'
    }
end
```

NOTE: If you are using this gem with devise with above snippet in `config/initializers/devise.rb` then do not create `config/initializers/omniauth.rb` which will conflict with devise configurations.

Then add the following to `config/routes.rb` so the callback routes are defined.

```ruby
devise_for :users, controllers: { omniauth_callbacks: 'users/omniauth_callbacks' }
```

Make sure your model is omniauthable. Generally this is `/app/models/user.rb`

```ruby
devise :omniauthable, omniauth_providers: [:cognito_oauth2]
```

Then make sure your callbacks controller is setup.

```ruby
class Users::OmniauthCallbacksController < Devise::OmniauthCallbacksController
  def cognito_oauth2
    @user = User.from_omniauth(request.env["omniauth.auth"])

    if @user.persisted?
      sign_in_and_redirect @user, event: :authentication
      set_flash_message(:notice, :success, kind: "Cognito") if is_navigational_format?
    else
      # session["devise.cognito_data"] = request.env["omniauth.auth"].except("extra", "provider") # causes cookie overflow - consider creating a session table in your DB to store large session info https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9473808/cookie-overflow-in-rails-application
      set_flash_message(:alert, :failure, kind: "Cognito")
      redirect_to new_user_session_path
    end
  end

  def failure
    redirect_to new_user_session_path
  end
end
```

and bind to or create the user

```ruby
def self.from_omniauth(auth)
  where(email: auth.info.email, uid: auth.uid, provider: "cognito_oauth2").first_or_create! do |user|
    user.email = auth.info.email
    user.password = Devise.friendly_token[0,20]
    user.provider = "cognito_oauth2"
    user.uid = auth.uid
  end
end
```

Devise will automatically generate a link for you on their default signup/login view, but you can make your own like this if necessary:

```erb
<%= link_to "Sign in with Cognito", user_cognito_oauth2_omniauth_authorize_path %>

<%# Devise prior 4.1.0: %>
<%= link_to "Sign in with Cognito", user_omniauth_authorize_path(:cognito_oauth2) %>
```

An overview is available at https://github.com/plataformatec/devise/wiki/OmniAuth:-Overview

## Configuration

You can configure several options, which you pass in to the `provider` method via a hash:

* `scope`: A comma-separated list of permissions you want to request from the user. See the [AWS Cognito docs](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mobile/understanding-amazon-cognito-user-pool-oauth-2-0-grants/) for a full list of available permissions. Caveats:
  * The `openid` and `email` scopes are used by default. By defining your own `scope`, you override these defaults

* `redirect_uri`: Override the redirect_uri used by the gem. The default is to redirect back to your app and then follow the flow from your `cognito_oauth2` callback URL

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://gitlab.com/felixfortis/omniauth-cognito-oauth2.


## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Update README.md for readability and better flow

README.md, after:

# Omniauth::Cognito::Oauth2

[Ruby gem Oauth2 strategy for AWS Cognito](https://rubygems.org/gems/omniauth-cognito-oauth2)

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-cognito-oauth2'
```

Then `bundle install`

## Setup

You will need:

 - An AWS Cognito user pool
 - A domain setup for your user pool - once set it will look something like `https://your_user_pool_domain.auth.us-west-1.amazoncognito.com`
 - An App Client set up for your user pool:
   - Callback URL will look something like `https://localhost:3000/users/auth/cognito_oauth2/callback` (standard with a Devise User model)
   - Signout URL will look something like `https://localhost:3000/users/sign_out` (standard with a Devise User model)
   - Check at least the `Authorization code grant` OAuth flow option
   - Check at least the `openid` and `email` OAuth scopes
   - *Don't* set up your App Client with a 'Client Secret' because at the moment they don't work and won't allow you to authenticate.
 - For development, you'll need to be running your app with SSL enabled, because Cognito user pool App Client callback and signout URLs only allow HTTPS URLs. This unaffiliated [blog post](https://madeintandem.com/blog/rails-local-development-https-using-self-signed-ssl-certificate/) details steps on obtaining a self-signed SSL certificate and running rails in SSL mode while referencing the cert
 - A env/config variable which contains your domain
 - A env/config variable which contains your App Client ID

## Usage

Note: More info at https://github.com/plataformatec/devise/wiki/OmniAuth:-Overview

Here's an example for adding the middleware to a Rails app in `config/initializers/omniauth.rb`:

```ruby
require 'omniauth_cognito_oauth2'

Rails.application.config.middleware.use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :cognito_oauth2, 'MY_COGNITO_CLIENT_ID', scope: [:openid, :email],
    setup: lambda{ |env|
      env['omniauth.strategy'].options[:client_options].site = 'MY_COGNITO_USER_POOL_DOMAIN'
    }
end
```

Since Cognito may have many different Oauth client sites, we are using a lambda to dynamically set the site that you wish to authenticate against. This will be the domain you have setup for your user pool. There is more info in the Authorization Code Grant section in the AWS docs [here](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mobile/understanding-amazon-cognito-user-pool-oauth-2-0-grants/).

You can now access the OmniAuth Cognito OAuth2 URL: `/auth/cognito_oauth2`

## Usage (Devise)

First define your client id and user pool domain in `config/initializers/devise.rb`.

```ruby
require 'omniauth_cognito_oauth2'

Devise.setup do |config|
  #...
  config.omniauth :cognito_oauth2, 'MY_COGNITO_CLIENT_ID', scope: [:openid, :email],
    setup: lambda{ |env|
      env['omniauth.strategy'].options[:client_options].site = 'MY_COGNITO_USER_POOL_DOMAIN'
    }
end
```

NOTE: If you use the above snippet in `config/initializers/devise.rb` then do not create `config/initializers/omniauth.rb`, as it will conflict with devise config.

Then add the following to `config/routes.rb` so the callback routes are defined.

```ruby
devise_for :users, controllers: { omniauth_callbacks: 'users/omniauth_callbacks' }
```

Then make sure your callbacks controller is setup.

```ruby
class Users::OmniauthCallbacksController < Devise::OmniauthCallbacksController
  def cognito_oauth2
    @user = User.from_omniauth(request.env["omniauth.auth"])

    if @user.persisted?
      sign_in_and_redirect @user, event: :authentication
      set_flash_message(:notice, :success, kind: "Cognito") if is_navigational_format?
    else
      # session["devise.cognito_data"] = request.env["omniauth.auth"].except("extra", "provider") # causes cookie overflow - consider creating a session table in your DB to store large session info https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9473808/cookie-overflow-in-rails-application
      set_flash_message(:alert, :failure, kind: "Cognito")
      redirect_to new_user_session_path
    end
  end

  def failure
    redirect_to new_user_session_path
  end
end
```

Now add the `omniauthable` and `omniauth_providers` devise options to your user model, along with a method for binding to or creating the user.

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  devise :omniauthable, omniauth_providers: [:cognito_oauth2]

#...

  def self.from_omniauth(auth)
    where(email: auth.info.email, uid: auth.uid, provider: "cognito_oauth2").first_or_create! do |user|
      user.email = auth.info.email
      user.password = Devise.friendly_token[0,20]
      user.provider = "cognito_oauth2"
      user.uid = auth.uid
    end
  end
end
```

Devise will automatically generate a link for you on their default signup/login view, but you can make your own like this if necessary:

```erb
<%= link_to "Sign in with Cognito", user_cognito_oauth2_omniauth_authorize_path %>

<%# Devise prior 4.1.0: %>
<%= link_to "Sign in with Cognito", user_omniauth_authorize_path(:cognito_oauth2) %>
```

Check `rake routes` if you are unsure.

## Configuration

You can configure several options, which you pass in to the `provider` method via a hash:

* `scope`: A comma-separated list of permissions you want to request from the user. See the [AWS Cognito docs](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mobile/understanding-amazon-cognito-user-pool-oauth-2-0-grants/) for a full list of available permissions. Caveats:
  * The `openid` and `email` scopes are needed by default. By defining your own `scope`, you override these defaults

* `redirect_uri`: Override the default redirect_uri used by the gem. The default is to redirect back to your app and then follow the flow from your `cognito_oauth2` callback URL

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on Gitlab at https://gitlab.com/felixfortis/omniauth-cognito-oauth2.


## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
